The only thing that he was talking about
was like he kind of wanted to be like
Hitchcockian version
of like a car chase, you know, cuz like
this is something that Hitchcock would
sort of do. On paper, one battle after
another's climactic car chase doesn't
sound that impressive. There's no hard
turns and only a single crash.
They're basically just driving in a
straight line, but with deceptively
complex camera work, which builds
tension unlike any car chase in recent
memory.
>> the reason is that
an audience get sweat.
Yeah. And they need relief. For example,
if anybody goes on a roller coaster,
they scream.
It goes down the big dip and up and
around they're screaming all the time,
but always get off giggling. If good
artists copy and great artists steal,
director Paul Thomas Anderson used the
blueprints for tension laid out by the
master of suspense himself to create an
iconic chase that embodies everything
about what a textbook car chase could
be.
We've talked to a few of One Battle
After Another's key creatives to get the
behind-the-scenes story of how the
film's climactic River of Hills chase
came to be. This is Art of the Scene.
Well, you know, it was interesting
because the River of Hills sequence
really kind of came during the process
of production.
It turns out that PTA didn't really have
the script completely finished before he
started location scouting. Paul knew he
wanted some kind of climactic showdown
between Will, Bob, and the forces of the
Christmas Adventurers Club, but it
wasn't until he saw the River of Hills
that the film's climactic car chase
began to reveal itself. But as far as
the script went, it wasn't really tied
up at the end. It was more of a TBD.
This may happen, this may not happen.
So, we weren't really there. I don't
ever remember there actually it being
stated as a car chase.
>> It turns out that it was Michael
Gleyzer's location scouting that was
crucial to kicking PTA's imagination
into gear to figure out the film's final
confrontation. That location came about
because Michael Glazer, the the location
manager, as he was driving in that part
of California, he found the road and
he's like, "Wow, this is kind of cool."
It's wild to think that this whole scene
exists because of a lark while they were
scouting. You know, we
took a left instead of a right to get
back to our hotel and then these
hills really revealed themselves right
when we turned left. They started
started slowly, started bigger and
bigger and bigger. Paul asked where we
were, what is this? And then he put his
cell phone on the dashboard and
everybody whipped out their iPhones and
started filming in front, behind,
rearview mirror of me driving
white knuckling over these hills and it
all kind of started to click for Paul.
But it wasn't until they went back again
with the second car where they figured
out how the oscillating roads and
multiple cars would provide the tension.
And then we came back again and brought
Brian,
stunt coordinator, who was driving his
truck and we were in a van and then we
can kind of see, you know, how this was
working and I was I remember Paul was
photographing out the back. I was
shooting one of the side mirrors and
then he was shooting the out the front.
It was more like a discovery of like,
"Wow, this could be there's a lot of
interesting things here just because of
the geography and seeing how it works
with another car and stuff."
>> PTA clearly came away from that scouting
trip with the inspiration for his
ending, but there was still a ton of
creativity, planning, and skill needed
to take some iPhone footage and turn it
into a proper car chase shot in 70 mm
VistaVision.
One of the challenges of the location,
too, was the fact that we it was a busy
road. One of the only ways to get from
California in California to Arizona on
the lower part of the state. We had like
a a 10-minute lockup period. And so in
10 minutes you had to be able to shoot
as much coverage as you could. One of
the more interesting challenges of the
River of Hills was making the footage
feel fast. Yes, PTA and director of
photography Michael Balhaus could
cheated a bit with camera lenses and
did, but the desert was a tough spot to
visualize speed because there weren't
many fixed objects in the background to
look at. It has a lot to do with what's
in the background.
Um what's strobing through frame. If
there's not much movement through frame,
it's really difficult to sense speed.
The obvious solution was also the
coolest. Drive faster. For the River of
Hills we're probably 60 or 70.
Uh there was a moment with Leo in the
car.
Um
we're doing about 90, 95. It's it's
story driven. And you know, there's also
times we need to go a little faster cuz
sometimes you don't feel the sense of
speed. So what might be, you know, say
in this example is 90, 95 may only feel
like 65 or 70 on on the screen. But it
really became about like how are you
going to get the camera
moving with the cars. This scene really
works thanks to all the coverage they
were able to shoot, which they did in
10-minute bursts going almost 70 mph,
usually with multiple cameras rolling.
It was important to shoot as much as
they could because PTA knew this scene
lived and died in the edit.
All from day one. That's exactly he had
a vision and he knew what he was exactly
what he wanted to see and he didn't
stray from it.
>> thing that he was talking about was like
he kind of wanted to be like
Hitchcockian version
of like a car chase, you know, cuz like
this is something that Hitchcock would
sort of do. What I've changed
is the chase to rescue someone.
That I've never crosscut. You see in the
early Griffith days,
you know, they he used to crosscut with
a man
either going to the gallows or the
guillotine
with the rescuer on the way.
Well, I've tended to avoid that kind of
crosscutting
in a chase sequence
and stayed either with one or the other
which makes the audience sweat the more
because you don't show the progress of
the rescuer. That is what we were doing.
It's hard to sustain. You know, even
though though the sequence is I think
only like 2 and 1/2 minutes or
something, it's it is hard to create
these peaks and valleys. In order to
keep the tension high, Andy had to do
three things simultaneously. First, he
had to make the scene feel fast. Second,
he had to make the audience feel Willa's
anxiety of being chased. And finally,
for the climax to pay off, he had to
keep the oscillation of the road in
front of the audience's mind without
making it feel like a gimmick. When it
So, we ended up using some wide angle
zooms.
That allowed us to to to be down right
on the level and get as low as possible.
And then accelerate behind the car. The
other thing that's really interesting
about the film that sequence is is the
use of focus. Shots like this one, where
they attached an elevator rig to an SUV,
allowed the 70 mm camera to hover just
inches off the ground, capturing both
the grit of the road and the sheer sense
of speed because the road rushes past
the camera so quickly.
But the shots that truly internalize
Willa's fear as the audience's come in
these rearview mirror shots from Willa's
perspective. They're tight and
claustrophobic, but also frightening
because she's only got that narrow view
on her pursuer. The camera work isn't
just building the tension alone. There's
also sound design, too. In fact,
we kind of go into this like we're in
the mind of Willa a little bit and then
we're kind of cutting to
like kind of close-ups of the road going
up and down in the rearview mirror and
it
it looks like she might have, you know,
escaped Tim's car.
The sound kind of all dips out in a way,
and you're just hearing the road sound
and the like Johnny's score. So, that
was kind of a a choice
while we were in the mix. We're like,
this could be interesting to kind of
have it all kind of be going down and
and sort of feel very closed off. And
then, once you see him in the rearview
mirror,
you you pick it up again, and you hear
the engines, and you hear everything
again. While the tight shots and sound
design really help put the audience in
the driver's seat with Willa, they
aren't the shots that everyone talks
about when they're walking out of the
theater. These wide shots, where the
River of Hills oscillation is on full
display, were some of the more
complicated shots to get in the can.
Getting one car to dip as the other
peaks wasn't an accident. It took a lot
of planning, but it's the shot where Bob
enters the scene that took even more
coordination. I mean, you got there's
obviously multiple takes to try and get
the timing just right, but it really is
just about timing and seeing the cars
and maintaining a speed and a gap,
um and then getting feedback from uh
whoever's, you know, watching the
monitor.
>> In just one shot, the cat-and-mouse
chase between Tim and Willa completely
changes because their rescuer literally
enters the picture. It really was just
the timing and pacing of getting the
cars to be in frame when Paul wanted
them in frame. You know, just a really
it's a really, really precise moment.
>> Now that Bob was gaining ground in the
River of Hills, this chase ultimately
needed to crescendo. And what better way
to do that than to have Willa's ambush
take place at the top of a really large
hill. But here's the thing, this huge
hill isn't actually part of the River of
Hills. It was actually another location
hours away. We kind of didn't know what
to do with the Texas dip until we found
the River of Hills. And then, the aha
moment, that could be the finale because
the Texas dip, where she's hiding behind
the sign, you literally can't see and
you're going like 80, you can't see
anything over the horizon, especially
when the sun is in your eyes. Ending the
chase at the top of the Texas dip is
such an elegantly simple way to close
the scene. It felt completely natural.
Will it was not some teenage Steve
McQueen outrunning or outdriving her
pursuer wouldn't feel believable.
Instead, Will it overcame the Christmas
Adventurers Club by using her location
to her advantage. And that's exactly
what Paul Thomas Anderson did to create
one of the best car chases of the 2020s.
Hey guys, thanks so much for watching.
If you'd like to watch more Art of the
Scene, please check out our Art of the
Scene for Goldeneye or our deep dive on
the Copa shot from Goodfellas. And of
course, be sure to subscribe to CineFix.